cloud computinh

ex. Netflix

	- delivery : streaming services. deliver from anywhere to anywhere.
	- availability : available 24/7
	- Analytics : analyzing our personal data. like each user's age, locality, subscription packages, genders etc. 
	
to provide these features to users, they have to use cloud computing. 


ex2. youtube

	- storage : all videos of all youtubers must be stored on servers
	- scalability : all youtubers must be able to upload any size/quality of videos they want regardless of any restriction
	- personalization : Ads , show related videos to users.
	- Moderation : Sensitive media must be taken down.
	
ex3. Amazon prime video

	- Analytics : data from amazon e-commerce account and data from amazon prime video account will be analyzed
	- Redundancy : these 2 platform's data causes redundancy
	- critical : if data gets lost/leaked/breached, then user's confidence get's low, they won't reappear to use the services. so they decentralize the data.	
	- Recommendation : based on media consumed on amazon prime video, amazon e-commerce can recommend products to the user
	
ex4. Google Drive

	- Storage : stores any kind of data
	- Accessibility : accessible everywhere
	- Scability : if paid money, more storage is allowed
	- Availability : available 24/7
	
ex5. icloud
	
	- Storage :
	- synchronization : copy on mobile, paste on Mac / iwatch / ipad etc if same account is on all devices.
	- Accessibility : 
	- security :
	
ex6. AWS

	- services : different types of services
	- static hosting : want to run website but don't want to manage backend, just develope it and AWS can maintain
	- Scalability : add/remove resources
	- security : encrypted 
	- personalization : recommend relative services that we already used
	- Analytics : analyze our data 
	- Foundation : all these services are available, no need to create from scratch. just go and deploy.
	

Refer cloud computing evolution image

What is cloud computing ? 

	cloud computing is on-demand delivery of IT resources over internet with pay-as-you-go pricing.
	
	= consistent delivery
	= on demand access
	= IT resources
	
Cloud Computing Components : 

1 Hardware : 
	Processors
	ROM
	RAM
	GPU
	PSU
	
2 OS 
	
3 Networking 
	Internet Drivers
	
4 Storage
	HDD
	SSD
	
Virtualization : 

	virtualization enables creation of virtual machines, which are isolated and independent environments that mimic functionality of physical computer.

	- each VM operates as it is a self-contained system, runs its own OS and apps. (containerization)

	- multiple VMs can co-exist on a single server, allowing more efficient use of h/w resources.

single physical machine turns into multiple isolated and independent machines called as virtualization. 



Hypervisor : special program that helps divide big computer into smaller parts.

	sits between physical hardware and virtual machine.

	main job is to manage and allocate resources to VMs.

	creates virtual h/w and presents to each VMs, allowing them to have own OS and apps

	each VM operates independently
	

Type 1 or bare-metal hypervisor : 
	runs directly on physical machine. 
	manages the VM
	directly communicates with RAM / Processors
	High performance and efficiency
	
Type 2 or Hosted Hypervisor
	
	Runs on top of existing OS
	installed as a software
	creates VM within host OS
	used as per individual need
	

Deployment models : 

	1 Public cloud : 

		deployment model for multiple organizations
		hosted by 3rd party on the internet
		high scalability
		Pay-as-you-go
		accessible over internet
		
		ex. Azure, AWS
		
		
	2 private cloud : 

		dedicated deployment model for single organization
		hosted on-premises or managed by third party
		more security, customization, as per user complainces
		ex. VMware vSphere, OpenStack, Azure Stack
		
		
	3 hybrid cloud : 

		mixture of both
		allows to use both on-premise and public cloud resources
		data can move freely between public and private cloud
		ex. AWS outposts( it will give private cloud access) , Azure Stack, Google Anthos
	
Service Models : 

	1 SaaS : 
			s/w apps provided on internet
			Gmail
			
	2 PaaS : 
			platform and dev tools offered as a service
			appplications run on it
			Google Colab
			
	3 IaaS : 
			vistualized servers, storage, and networking, security provided as a service
			AWS

	4 Faas : Function as a Service
	
			cloud computing service, that allows customers to execute code at a specified event without managing the comlpex infrastructure. 
			
			associated with building and launching microservices applications.
			
